=== ORIGINAL PDF: 2506.00007v1_Emerging_ML-AI_Techniques_for_Analog_and_RF_EDA.pdf ===\n\nRaw text length: 52586 characters\nCleaned text length: 52299 characters\nNumber of segments: 29\n\n=== CLEANED TEXT ===\n\nEmerging ML-AI Techniques for Analog and RF EDA Zhengfeng Wu Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Nnaemeka Achebe Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Ziyi Chen Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Vaibhav V. Rao Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Pratik Shrestha Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Ioannis Savidis Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Abstract This survey explores the integration of machine learning (ML) into EDA workflows for analog and RF circuits, addressing challenges unique to analog design, which include complex constraints, non- linear design spaces, and high computational costs. State-of-the-art learning and optimization techniques are reviewed for circuit tasks such as constraint formulation, topology generation, device mod- eling, sizing, placement, and routing. The survey highlights the capability of ML to enhance automation, improve design quality, and reduce time-to-market while meeting the target specifications of an analog or RF circuit. Emerging trends and cross-cutting chal- lenges, including robustness to variations and considerations of interconnect parasitics, are also discussed. Keywords Analog EDA, RF Design Automation, Machine Learning, AI in EDA 1 Introduction to ML-AI Techniques for Analog RF Design Automation Analog design remains a cornerstone of modern integrated circuits, accounting for approximately 20 of the chip area and 40 of the total IC design effort [1]. In addition, analog circuits contribute to approximately 50 of the costly design iterations that occur during development [1]. As analog and RF systems evolve toward higher frequencies and greater levels of integration, traditional knowledge- driven methods struggle to address the increasing computational and design complexities [2]. Electronic design automation (EDA) has transformed the design of an IC that allow for high-level circuit implementation strate- gies. However, while digital design has achieved high levels of abstraction and automation, analog design automation lags behind as analog circuits are highly customized [3]. Analog synthesis and physical design typically follows a hierarchical flow that includes topology generation, device sizing, layout generation, and post- layout verification. The challenges of automating analog design stem from the highly non-linear design space, computational com- plexity, and stringent performance and manufacturing constraints, which result in complex multi-objective optimization problems that require intricate trade-offs between competing circuit objectives [3]. Recent advances in machine learning (ML) offer promising solu- tions, allowing for the accurate prediction of critical circuit param- eters and the guidance of early-stage design decisions. Data-driven methods have been proposed to enhance productivity and improve the quality of design provided by EDA workflows. This survey explores the integration of ML in analog EDA, cover- ing both synthesis and physical design tasks. In Section II, a review of learning and optimization algorithms is provided. A discussion of ML-based algorithms for analog circuit synthesis and physical design tasks is provided in Section III. Cross-cutting challenges, including parasitic-aware design and variation effects are described in Section IV. Finally, the importance of standardized benchmarks and datasets to drive further innovation in ML-driven analog EDA is discussed in Section V. 2 Overview of Learning and Optimization Algorithms for Analog EDA In this section, an overview is provided on the learning and op- timization algorithms utilized for analog circuit design. Learning models map from circuit features and design variables to target performance parameters, enabling informed decisions during early design stages and reducing reliance on costly simulations. The learning models are usually applied as surrogates of the design space that guide optimization algorithms. Learning techniques including statistical models, neural net- works, and transfer learning for circuit modeling tasks are intro- duced in Section II-A. In Section II-B, methods including Bayesian optimization and reinforcement learning are described that are uti- lized to optimize complex analog design spaces. An overview of applying ML algorithms for the synthesis and physical design of analog circuits is shown in Fig. 1. 2.1 Learning Learning algorithms include statistical and neural network based methods. A description of both follows. 2.1.1 Statistical Learning Algorithms Statistical learning methods, including linear regression, support vector machines [4], and tree- based models such as random forests and gradient boosting [5], have been widely used for analog design tasks. The statistical learning methods have proven to be effective when computational resources are limited and available data is sparse. The interpretability pro- vided by statistical learning models, including the analysis of the importance of features and the visualization of decision processes such as the structure of a tree, provide benefit when analyzing the relationships amongst design parameters [5, 6]. , Zhengfeng Wu, Nnaemeka Achebe, Ziyi Chen, Vaibhav V. Rao, Pratik Shrestha, and Ioannis Savidis Figure 1: An overview of applying machine learning for the synthesis and physical design of an analog and RF circuit. 2.1.2 Neural Network-Based Approaches Over the past ten years, neural network-based approaches have gained traction in analog design automation, beginning with the versatile multi-layer percep- tron (MLP) [7]. More recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) [8 11] have shown significant promise in learning circuit connectivity and topological features. For graph representations to model analog circuit behaviors at the device level, vertices often represent active and passive devices, while edges represent nets [8, 9]. However, some models treat both devices and nets as nodes when intercon- nect features are emphasized for better prediction or optimization performance [10, 11]. Generative adversarial networks (GAN) have also been applied to guide the routing of an analog IC [12]. Transfer learning permits the reuse of pre-trained model layers on new tasks [13], during either standalone model training [14] or execution of optimization [15]. Transfer learning allows for the gen- eralization of models across circuit design objectives including for different technology nodes and different circuit topologies [14 16], which reduces data requirements and improves model performance. 2.2 Optimization Two classes of optimization algorithms include classic methods and surrogate-assisted. A discussion of each follows. 2.2.1 Classic Optimization Algorithms Algorithms based on gra- dient descent are computationally efficient and are often used for problems with differentiable cost functions [17]. However, the al- gorithms are limited by potential convergence to local minima, especially in non-convex design spaces. Optimization utilizing heuristic-based evolution algorithms, in- cluding simulated annealing, particle swarm optimization, and ge- netic algorithms [18], allow for a global exploration of the design space. Genetic algorithms apply principles of evolution to itera- tively refine populations of design candidates through crossover and mutation operations [18]. 2.2.2 Surrogate-Assisted Optimization Algorithms that perform surrogate-assisted optimization, including Bayesian optimization (BO) [19, 20], more efficiently explore the design space by utilizing surrogate models like Gaussian processes to approximate expensive cost functions. The search process, therefore, proceeds with fewer costly evaluations of the design space. Reinforcement learning (RL) [15, 21] has been explored for opti- mization in a sequentially executed decision-making flow. In RL, an agent iteratively interacts with the circuit simulation environ- ment and refines actions to maximize cumulative rewards based on results returned from the simulation framework. Emerging ML-AI Techniques for Analog and RF EDA , 2.3 Large Language Models for Analog EDA Since 2023, large language models (LLMs) have emerged as promis- ing tools to address the challenges in design [22 24]. LLMs excel in processing unstructured inputs, such as textual specifications, and translating high-level requirements into actionable design strate- gies. LLMs have been applied to recognize patterns in circuit data, predict relationships between parameters and performance, gen- erate topologies, and derive sizing specifications based on prior knowledge [22 24]. In addition, LLMs integrate with optimization algorithms including BO and RL to iteratively determine and refine solutions that meet design objectives [22, 23]. LLMs also provide an intuitive and accessible interface, lowering the barrier to entry for EDA tool users. 3 Data-Driven and Heuristic Approaches for Analog Circuit Synthesis and Physical Design Analog and RF circuit synthesis and physical design involve a di- verse set of tasks, which include defining design constraints, gener- ating topologies, modeling devices, sizing circuits, and optimizing layouts. Unlike digital design, nuanced constraints such as device matching, symmetry, parasitic effects, and noise isolation must be considered. An overview of heuristic and ML-based approaches for analog RF synthesis and physical design is provided in this section. 3.1 Defining Constraints and Design Specifications Primitives including differential pairs and current mirrors form the basis of an analog circuit. Accurate recognition of circuit hierar- chies is required to properly extract constraints on the symmetry of devices when generating a physical layout. The detected symmetri- cal device groupings also provide supplemental information when utilized as features in ML models for downstream circuit modeling and optimization tasks. Traditional methods rely on isomorphism matching between cir- cuit graphs and primitive libraries [25, 26], with some approaches dynamically constructing libraries during execution [27]. More recently, learning-based methods that utilize GNNs have been pro- posed to classify hierarchical circuit levels [10], predict graph edit distances [28], and detect circuit substructures [29]. Heterogeneous GNNs predict device and system-level symmetries by capturing topological features [30]. To return the specific circuit category of a detected functional group, hybrid approaches that combine GNNs with subgraph isomorphism[31] have been proposed. A compara- tive analysis of heuristic isomorphism-based and learning-based algorithms that recognize hierarchy is provided in [32]. 3.2 Automated Topology Generation for Analog Circuits Given a set of specifications, the design of an analog circuit begins with the synthesis of a circuit topology, which traditionally requires extensive human expertise and intuition [33]. Automating topology selection and generation is computationally expensive due to the large search space [34]. Exploring all possible topologies is neither practical nor efficient. Although the infusion of prior knowledge through a pre-defined topology library narrows the design space, the discovery of novel topologies is limited. A scalable and effi- cient solution for topology synthesis in analog design is yet to be provided. Techniques that generate analog circuit topologies are catego- rized into knowledge-based methods and evolutionary algorithm- based methods [34]. With knowledge-based methods, circuit com- ponents are systematically assembled according to predefined rules. Bell Laboratories Analog Design Expert System (BLADES) [35] is a knowledge-based algorithm that integrates formal mathematical methods with heuristic reasoning. A graph-based circuit topology generator is proposed that generates candidate topologies as hierar- chical tree structures, guided by graph grammar rules and building blocks from a predefined library [36]. Evolutionary algorithms utilize a stochastic exploration process to address high-dimensional, discrete multi-objective tasks. In [37], circuit topologies are encoded as connection matrices and value vectors, where crossover and mutation are applied to explore a vast design space of up to 1019 possible configurations. In [33], a seg- mented evolution strategy is proposed that progressively refines the topology using a genetic algorithm while optimizing for objectives that include performance, component reduction, and area. Hybrid approaches that integrate both heuristic and ML methods are increasingly being explored. A technique is proposed [21] that combines reinforcement learning techniques with a policy gradient neural network to iteratively construct circuit topologies using predefined building blocks, while the performance is evaluated using symbolic analysis and SPICE simulations. 3.3 Device Modeling and Synthesis of EM Structures Modeling, design, and optimization of active and passive devices as well as electromagnetic (EM) structures is required for analog RF cir- cuit design. Traditional modeling of EM structures relies on highly accurate mathematical calculations, which include use of finite ele- ment methods (FEM) and method of moments (MoM) to compute EM fields. However, the solvers are computationally costly, particu- larly for novel devices such as FinFET and gate-all-around transis- tors, which hinders design technology co-optimization (DTCO)[38]. ML has emerged as an effective tool to enhance traditional modeling methods by improving prediction accuracy and reducing computa- tional cost. ML has been applied for the accurate modeling and represen- tation of parameters of devices and EM structures, where param- eters including resonant frequency, bandwidth, and impedance directly impact performance. In [39], ML is applied to predict the current and capacitance of FinFETs based on other device parame- ters. An autoencoder-based approach is utilized to develop a PIN diode model, utilizing unsupervised learning to compress high- dimensional data into a latent space[40], which accelerates the extraction of device parameters. In [41], an ANN is introduced that performs real-time BSIM parameter extraction in nanosheet FETs, while accounting for multiple structural variations. For the modeling of EM structures, an on-chip transformer au- tomatic synthesis (OTAS) flow is proposed in [42] that utilizes Gaussian process regression models to automate the translation of , Zhengfeng Wu, Nnaemeka Achebe, Ziyi Chen, Vaibhav V. Rao, Pratik Shrestha, and Ioannis Savidis system requirements into transformer design parameters, reduc- ing the effort required for impedance matching. Similarly, recent work on deep learning-enabled mmWave power amplifier (PA) and antenna design has shown translations from high-level design specifications to physical layouts[43]. Physics-based device equations have been integrated with ML models to align model predictions with known device behaviors. In [44], analytical equations process variations such as current shifts and threshold voltage shifts are integrated into the learning models. A graph-based compact model (GCM) is proposed in [45] that represents physical parameters, including threshold voltages and channel length dependence, as graph nodes. Implemented in Verilog-A, GCM provides accurate predictions with 300 sample points, while passing industry-standard benchmark tests. GCM is integrated with SPICE simulations, offering a computationally efficient approach to advanced transistor modeling. 3.4 Analog RF Performance Modeling and Device Sizing Determining the optimal sizes of analog devices, including tran- sistors, diodes, resistors, capacitors, and inductors, ensures that the chosen topology satisfies the design specifications. The early methods that sized devices are based on solving analytical equa- tions that establish relationships between design parameters and performance metrics, where multi-objective optimization problems are formulated [46] [18]. As technology scales, knowledge-based methods face limitations due to the growing complexity of circuit equations and the effort required to reconcile discrepancies between theoretical optimizations and simulation results. Using data from simulation, data-driven techniques are utilized in a bottom-up approach to model circuit behaviors and extract design insights. Early automated sizing techniques are based on statistical learning methods [2, 47]. In [47], a statistical learning method is proposed that combines Kriging metamodeling with simulated annealing to optimize a sense amplifier. In CALT [48], random forest classifiers are used as surrogate models of circuit parameters and genetic algorithms are used to predict whether de- signs meet specified performance thresholds. More recently, neural networks have been applied with optimization algorithms [7, 49]. Reinforcement learning [15, 50, 51] and Bayesian optimization [20] are state-of-the-art optimization engines for analog device sizing. With the RL framework proposed in DNN-Opt [51], an actor net- work is utilized for tuning design parameters and a critic network is applied for predicting performance parameters, which results in up to a 24x reduction in the number of executed SPICE simulations. GNNs are integrated into RL-based search in [15] and [50], where circuit topology information is included for optimization. To accelerate the execution of sizing algorithms, techniques have been proposed that allow parallelization. When the simulation time for a given set of design variables is constant, parallel execution is leveraged for algorithms compatible with multi-core simulators, whereas those relying on sequential decision-making remain serial. A batch-constrained Bayesian optimization (BO) methodology is proposed in [20] that utilizes a multi-objective acquisition function ensemble as a substitute of the sequential execution of traditional BO. An asynchronously parallel batch optimization method for analog sizing is proposed in [52] that utilizes a ranking approxima- tion method to select between cheap and expensive simulations of circuit parameters. Another emerging research direction is layout-driven device siz- ing [52], which includes an iterative design loop between schematic- level sizing and layout generation, minimizing the need for addi- tional post-layout adjustments. 3.5 Placement Optimization in Analog Design Analog IC placement involves determining the optimal locations for devices within a given circuit topology to optimize specific perfor- mance metrics. The placement algorithm must adhere to topological constraints, including device matching, symmetry between devices or device groups, and proximity requirements. Depending on the target application, constraints that include alignment, thermal gra- dients, or current signal flows must also be met [3]. Traditional analog circuit placement methodologies have been mostly manual, leading to an increase in circuit development time and cost. ML-based approaches proposed in [53 56] utilize ANNs and deep generative models to provide an optimum placement of a circuit while considering topological constraints. In [53, 54], a non- linear ANN model is proposed that is trained with semi-supervised learning. The ANN outputs the placement coordinates of each cell (sub-block) for a given sizing and set of topological constraints. DeepPlacer, a deep learning generative model, is proposed that performs the placement of multiple amplifier topologies in less than 150 ms across different technology nodes [55], proving the scalability of ML-based placement methodologies. Unsupervised models including AGraph2Seq introduce structure through an attention-based graph-to-sequence encoder-decoder ar- chitecture that enables efficient placement of analog circuit blocks with a minimal set of trainable parameters [56]. The AGraph2Seq methodology encodes the topological constraints of the circuit us- ing relational GCNs and a long short-term memory (LSTM) decoder, which outputs the position of a device considering the relative po- sitions of the devices that have already been placed. Graph-based ML techniques proposed in [57] and [58] explore hierarchical circuit decomposition and identifying symmetry con- straints for physical placement. In [57], a GNN based on a neural tensor network is integrated with exact graph matching to account for multi-level symmetrical hierarchies when performing place- ment. In [12], 𝑊𝑒𝑙𝑙𝐺𝐴𝑁is proposed, which is a generative adver- sarial network (GAN) that is trained on high quality layouts that are manually generated. A conditional GAN is utilized to generate analog layouts that mimick the target circuit behavior. For RF placement, a depth-first device placement strategy is proposed in [59] that utilizes parameterized cells. A decision tree model identifies the coordinates of placed devices, rotation angles, and mirror operations. Precise pin positions and alignment in rout- ing are computed using analytical models. Constraints including impedance matching and electromagnetic performance are con- sidered. For instance, a 5-ring LNA (6 13 GHz) was placed in 86 ms. The generated RF layout provides improved performance over layouts generated with Keysight ADS. Millimeter-wave power amplifiers, passives, and EM structures are physically placed utilizing a deep-learning-based inverse design Emerging ML-AI Techniques for Analog and RF EDA , framework [60]. A convolutional neural network (CNN) is utilized to predict scattering parameters for 2 D planar structures, while a genetic algorithm optimizes the spatial configuration [60]. The generated power amplifier achieves a power added efficiency (PAE) of 16 -24.7 across a 3-dB bandwidth of 30-94 GHz. The approach expands the design space beyond pre-defined templates, achieving efficiency performance in less time. 3.6 Routing Strategies in Analog RF Design Automation Routing significantly impacts the performance and manufacturabil- ity of a circuit. While the core objective of routing algorithms is to find the shortest physical path between two connected nodes of a graph, routing for analog and RF circuits must address additional performance-critical constraints including symmetry, minimiza- tion of parasitic impedances, and noise isolation, while adhering to geometric and electrical design rules. Analog routing is, therefore, a complex optimization problem despite the smaller number of devices. In addition, for fabrication technology nodes below 22 nm, the complexity of design rules has increased nearly tenfold, surpass- ing 10,000 rules [61]. The increase in circuit and design constraints requires novel methodologies to efficiently achieve optimal routing of analog and RF circuits. Analog routing techniques share similarities with digital routing, utilizing maze routing, A , integer linear programming (ILP), SAT- based, and ML-guided algorithms. Common-centroid (CC) rout- ing [62] is introduced to mitigate mismatch due to systematic varia- tions. Circuit layouts that utilize CC routing ensure that systematic variations across a linear gradient are mitigated by symmetrically placed elements. However, CC layouts often introduce complex routing challenges and increased parasitic effects due to the intri- cate routing paths required to interconnect symmetric elements. BAG2 [46] integrates modularity and process portability into the routing strategy, using separate engines to automate wire place- ment, spacing, and layer selection. By isolating process-specific details with the developed parametric workflow, BAG2 adapts de- signs across technology nodes while balancing automated layout generation with designer input. Similarly, LAYGO [63] utilizes a grid-based and template-driven routing algorithm developed for sub-28 nm technology nodes. The algorithm abstracts the complex- ity of design rules by using predefined templates, grids, and relative placements to achieve design rule compliance and improved routing results. A two-step approach is implemented in ALG [64], which com- bines global and local routing with sensitivity analysis. Global routing ensures adherence to performance constraints including symmetry and matching, while local maze routing optimizes paths while accounting for complex constraints that include crosstalk and planarity. While effective, maze routing sacrifices efficiency for precision, which results in potential trade-offs in wirelength and algorithmic execution time. MAGICAL [65] integrates constraint-aware and symmetry-driven routing with placement. Using an A algorithm for detailed routing, symmetry constraints extracted from the netlist are enforced, en- suring electrical balance in critical nets such as for differential pairs. Based on the base router, GeniusRoute [66] leverages variational autoencoders to mimic human design expertise, combining proba- bilistic routing path selection with the detailed routing provided by A . The hybrid approach is robust and scalable, however, there is a dependence on the quality of the training data and heuristic functions. ALIGN [3] utilizes a hierarchical routing method that combines ILP and SAT algorithms. GNNs are utilized to extract and enforce electrical and geometric constraints [3]. As a result, a global op- timization of symmetry, coupling noise, and length matching is provided. However, the hierarchical routing algorithm is less scal- able due to the computational expense of solving large optimization problems. In [67], a variational autoencoder (VAE) is utilized to learn and generate routes for analog building blocks. The routing paths are ex- tracted from legacy layouts. The VAE models are trained to encode placement and routing features. By applying LLMs, GLayout [24] translates human language input of analog layout specifications into compact technology- generic layouts. Using retrieval augmented generation (RAG) and fine-tuned LLMs, GLayout achieves 70 task completion with 44 of generated layouts passing DRC and LVS verification for circuits containing blocks with up to 4 transistors. 4 Cross-Cutting Challenges in Analog RF Design Analog and RF circuit design faces cross-cutting challenges that im- pact all stages of the design flow. Key challenges include variations in process, voltage, and temperature (PVT), as well as variations due to aging, parasitics, and manufacturing effects. A survey of techniques that address the cross-cutting challenges is provided. 4.1 Designing for Variation and Yield A robust analog circuit compensates for process, voltage, tempera- ture, and aging variations to provide consistent performance that matches the target specifications. RobustAnalog[68] utilizes a multi- tasking RL engine, where each type of variation is assigned as a single task. A clustering algorithm is executed that groups tasks based on the difference between the current performance of the circuit and the target performance. In [69], the authors propose a simulation-based optimization framework for analog circuit sizing to ensure that both the target performance and the robustness specifications are met by limiting variations in performance across process and temperature corners. In [70], transistor-level simulations, geometric programming, and projection-based performance modeling are utilized to optimize circuits when considering process and environmental variations, which results in a trade-off between yield and performance. In [71], adaptive response surface modeling and structural homotopy are utilized for globally reliable, variation-aware sizing, leveraging stochastic gradient boosting and automated execution of SPICE simulations to optimize a complex, high-dimensional design space. 4.2 Modeling of Parasitic Impedance in Analog RF Circuits The parasitic extraction (PEX) of a circuit layout provides accuracy at the cost of high computational overhead [73]. The capacitance , Zhengfeng Wu, Nnaemeka Achebe, Ziyi Chen, Vaibhav V. Rao, Pratik Shrestha, and Ioannis Savidis Machine Learning Algorithms Utilized in Analog RF EDA Routing ML-Guided Routing [24, 65, 67] ILP and SAT-Based Routing [3] Maze and A Algorithms [64, 65] Common-Centroid Routing [72] Grid and Template-Based Methods [63] Placement Technology-Specific Placement [59, 60] Unsupervised Models [56] Deep Generative Models [12, 55] Graph-Based Methods [57, 58] Analog-Specific ML Models [53, 54] Circuit Performance Modeling and Device Sizing Parallelized Optimization [20, 52] Reinforcement Learning [50, 51] Bayesian Optimization [20] Statistical Methods [2, 47, 48] Device Modeling and EM Structure Synthesis Physics-Integrated Models [44, 45] ML for EM Structures [42, 43] ML-Based Parameter Extraction [39 41] Traditional Modeling Techniques [38] Topology Generation Reinforcement Learning [21] Evolutionary Algorithms [33, 37] Knowledge-Based Methods [35, 36] Hierarchy Recognition and Constraint Formulation Hybrid Approaches [31, 32] Graph-Based Methods [10, 28 30] Challenges Circuit Variations [68 71] Layout Effects [73 76] Matching Parasitics [75 77] Signal Integrity [77] Manufacturability [70, 71] Parallelization [68] Figure 2: Overview of ML applications and algorithms for analog RF circuit design. Cross-cutting challenges that impact all tasks are also highlighted. of an interconnect is reported in standard formats that include DSPF and SPEF. A simplified model of the total capacitance of an interconnect consists of a lumped value to ground and the coupling between neighboring lines. ML has been applied to predict interconnect impedance in dig- ital circuits [78, 79]. For analog design, random forests [74] and GNNs [75] have been applied for schematic-level parasitic esti- mation, capturing both device and interconnect parameters. Re- cent papers incorporate spatial features within the GNN module for post-placement capacitance prediction, utilizing self-attention mechanisms to predict the pairwise distances between devices [76] and edge-weighted GNNs learning from the pairwise distances be- tween devices [75]. The ML-based methods improve efficiency by reducing dependence on PEX, while providing accurate estimates of parasitics at multiple design stages and combining schematic and spatial features. An accurate prediction of the coupling capaci- tance is significantly more challenging than estimating the physical capacitance to ground. A classifier is utilized in [77] to identify heavily coupled nets prior to routing, which allows for the early mitigation of flagged timing paths. Emerging ML-AI Techniques for Analog and RF EDA , While ML-based interconnect models are effective for low-frequency (a few GHz) analog circuits, the models are inadequate at RF fre- quencies as interconnects behave like transmission lines rather than lumped resistors or capacitors. Dedicated matching networks, such as distributed LC component models and transmission line stubs, are implemented to achieve proper impedance matching, while ensuring the maximum power transfer and the minimal signal re- flection [80]. Surrogate models of Gaussian processes are utilized to represent a high-speed channel, a millimeter-wave filter, and a low- noise amplifier [80]. Despite advancements in ML-based parasitic modeling, further exploration is needed to extend ML techniques to RF impedance modeling. 5 Standardization and Open Benchmark Dataset for Analog RF ML-EDA When applying ML to analog design, an important challenge to address is the lack of standardization in data, workflows, and eval- uation protocols. For example, analog sizing techniques are com- monly evaluated on OTAs that are inconsistently characterized across different technologies. Due to the lack of standardization, a fair comparison between newly proposed techniques is challenging to perform and often errorneously completed [81]. Efforts in digital EDA [81 85] have highlighted the importance of unified frameworks and open datasets for the application of ML to EDA problems. Establishing uniform benchmarks and evaluation criteria for analog design will improve comparability, reproducibil- ity, and model reusability of workflows while addressing limitations due to dataset and PDK disparities. 6 Concluding Remarks ML has proven to be a powerful tool in improving productivity and design quality in analog and RF circuit design, complement- ing, rather than replacing, traditional techniques. A summary of heuristic and ML-based techniques for each circuit task is shown in Fig. 2. The infusion of ML AI reduces the traditionally steep learning curve needed in analog and RF design. References [1] IBS Corporation, IBS Corporation, Industry Reports, 2003. [2] R. Phelps, M. Krasnicki, R. A. Rutenbar, R. Carley, and J. R. Hellums, Anaconda: Simulation-based Synthesis of Analog Circuits via Stochastic Pattern Search, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 19, No. 6, pp. 703 717, Jul. 2000. [3] Tonmoy Dhar, Kishor Kunal, Yaguang Li, Meghna Madhusudan, Jitesh Poojary, Arvind K. Sharma, Wenbin Xu, Steven M. Burns, Ramesh Harjani, Jiang Hu, Desmond A. Kirkpatrick, Parijat Mukherjee, Soner Yaldiz, and Sachin S. Sapat- nekar, ALIGN: A System for Automating Analog Layout, IEEE Design Test, Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 8 18, Apr. 2021. [4] F. Bernardinis, M. Jordan, and A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, Support vector machines for analog circuit performance representation, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM Design Automation Conference, pp. 964 969, Jan. 2003. [5] T. Ho, A data complexity analysis of comparative advantages of decision forest constructors, Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Applications, Springer, Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 102 112, Jun. 2002. [6] T. Mcconaghy, P. Palmers, G. Gielen, and M. Steyaert, Automated extraction of expert knowledge in analog topology selection and sizing, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 392 395, Nov. 2008. [7] Y. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Li, R. Zhou, and Z. Lin, An artificial neural network assisted optimization system for analog design space exploration, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 39, No. 10, pp. 2640 2653, Oct. 2020. [8] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Circuit-GNN: A Graph Neural Network for Transistor-Level Modeling of Analog Circuit Hierarchies, Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 1 5, May. 2023. [9] Y. Li, Y. Lin, M. Madhusudan, A. Sharma, W. Xu, S. S. Sapatnekar, R. Harjani, and J. Hu, A Customized Graph Neural Network Model for Guiding Analog IC Placement, Proceedings of the International Conference On Computer Aided Design, pp. 1 9, Nov. 2020. [10] K. Kunal, T. Dhar, M. Madhusudan, J. Poojary, A. Sharma, W. Xu, S. M. Burns, J. Hu, R. Harjani, and S. S. Sapatnekar, GANA: Graph Convolutional Network Based Automated Netlist Annotation for Analog Circuits, Proceedings of the Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition, pp. 55 60, Mar. 2020. [11] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Edge-weighted graph neural networks for post-placement interconnect capacitance estimation of analog circuits, IEEE International Sym- posium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 1 5, May 2024. [12] B. Xu, Y. Lin, X. Tang, S. Li, L. Shen, N. Sun, and D. Z. Pan, WellGAN: Generative- Adversarial-Network-Guided Well Generation for Analog Mixed-Signal Circuit Layout, Proceedings of the Annual Design Automation Conference, pp. 1 6, Jun. 2019. [13] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, A Survey on Transfer Learning, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, Vol. 22, No. 10, pp. 1345 1359, Oct. 2010. [14] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Transfer Learning for Reuse of Analog Circuit Sizing Models Across Technology Nodes, IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 1 5, Jun. 2022. [15] H. Wang, K. Wang, J. Yang, L. Shen, N. Sun, H. Lee, and H. Song, GCN-RL Circuit Designer: Transferable Transistor Sizing with Graph Neural Networks and Reinforcement Learning, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM Design Automation Conference, pp. 1 6, Jul. 2020. [16] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Transfer of Performance Models Across Analog Circuit Topologies with Graph Neural Networks, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, pp. 159 165, Sep. 2022. [17] A. R. Conn, R. A. Haring, C. Visweswariah, and C. W. Wu, Circuit optimization via adjoint Lagrangians, Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Computer Aided Design, pp. 281 288, 1997. [18] M. Barros, J. Guilherme, and N. Horta, Analog circuits optimization based on evolutionary computation techniques, Proceedings of the Integration, the VLSI Journal, Vol. 43, No. 1, pp. 136 155, Jan. 2010. [19] Z. Gao, J. Tao, F. Yang, Y. Su, D. Zhou, and X. Zeng, Efficient performance trade- off modeling for analog circuit based on Bayesian neural network, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 1 8, Nov. 2019. [20] S. Zhang, F. Yang, C. Yan, D. Zhou, and X. Zeng, An Efficient Batch-Constrained Bayesian Optimization Approach for Analog Circuit Synthesis via Multiobjective Acquisition Ensemble, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 1 14, Jan. 2022. [21] Z. Zhao and L. Zhang, Analog Integrated Circuit Topology Synthesis With Deep Reinforcement Learning, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 41, pp. 5138 5151, December 2022. [22] C. Liu, W. Chen, A. Peng, Y. Du, L. Du, and J. Yang, AmpAgent: An LLM-based Multi-Agent System for Multi-stage Amplifier Schematic Design from Literature for Process and Performance Porting, arXiv, 2024. [23] Y. Yin, Y. Wang, B. Xu, and P. Li, ADO-LLM: Analog Design Bayesian Optimiza- tion with In-Context Learning of Large Language Models, arXiv, 2024. [24] A. Hammoud et al., Human Language to Analog Layout Using GLayout Lay- out Automation Framework, ACM IEEE Symposium on Machine Learning for Computer Aided Design, Sep. 2024. [25] M. E. Kole, J. Smit, and O. E. Herrmann, Modeling Symmetry in Analog Electronic Circuits, Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 315 318, Jun. 1994. [26] M. Eick, M. Strasser, K. Lu, U. Schlichtmann, and H. E. Graeb, Comprehensive Generation of Hierarchical Placement Rules for Analog Integrated Circuits, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 180 193, Jan. 2011. [27] M. Neuner, I. Abel, and H. Graeb, Library-free Structure Recognition for Analog Circuits, Proceedings of the Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition, pp. 1366 1371, Feb. 2021. [28] K. Kunal, J. Poojary, T. Dhar, M. Madhusudan, R. Harjani, and S. S. Sapatnekar, A General Approach for Identifying Hierarchical Symmetry Constraints for Analog Circuit Layout, Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 1 8, Nov. 2020. [29] K. Settaluri and E. Fallon, Fully Automated Analog Sub-circuit Clustering with Graph Convolutional Neural Networks, Proceedings of the Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition, pp. 1714 1715, Mar. 2020. [30] H. Chen, K. Zhu, M. Liu, X. Tang, N. Sun, and D. Z. Pan, Universal Symmetry Constraint Extraction for Analog and Mixed-signal Circuits with Graph Neural Networks, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Design Automation Conference, pp. 1243 1248, Dec. 2021. , Zhengfeng Wu, Nnaemeka Achebe, Ziyi Chen, Vaibhav V. Rao, Pratik Shrestha, and Ioannis Savidis [31] Z. Wu, I. Song, and I. Savidis, Hybrid Utilization of Subgraph Isomorphism and Relational Graph Convolutional Networks for Analog Functional Grouping Annotation, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for Computer Aided Design, pp. 1 6, Sep. 2023. [32] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Comparative Analysis of Graph Isomorphism and Graph Neural Networks for Analog Hierarchy Labeling, International Symposium on Quality Electronic Design, pp. 1 7, Apr. 2024. [33] M. Campilho-Gomes, R. Tavares, and J. Goes, Analog Flat-Level Circuit Synthesis With Genetic Algorithms, IEEE Access, Vol. 12, pp. 115532 115545, Aug. 2024. [34] Z. Zhao and L. Zhang, An Automated Topology Synthesis Framework for Analog Integrated Circuits, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 39, pp. 4325 4337, December 2020. [35] F. El-Turky and E. E. Perry, BLADES: An artificial intelligence approach to analog circuit design, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 8, pp. 680 692, June 1989. [36] Z. Zhao and L. Zhang, Graph-Grammar-Based Analog Circuit Topology Syn- thesis, Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, Sapporo, Japan, May. 2019, pp. 1 5, May. 2019. [37] Z. Rojec, A. Burmen, and I. Fajfar, An evolution-driven analog circuit topology synthesis, Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence, 2016. [38] J. R. Brews, A charge-sheet model of the MOSFET, Solid-State Electronics, Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 345 355, 1978. [39] H. Zhang, Y. Jing, and P. Zhou, Machine learning-based device modeling and per- formance optimization for FinFETs, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, Vol. 70, No. 4, pp. 1585 1593, Apr. 2023. [40] Y. Li, W. Dai, K. Geng, L. Zhang, R. Wang, and R. Huang, An automatic parameter extraction method based on autoencoder for PIN diode model, pp. 1 3, Oct. 2022. [41] Seunghwan Lee, Seungjoon Eom, Jinsu Jeong, Junjong Lee, Sanguk Lee, Hyeok Yun, Yonghwan Ahn, and Rock-Hyun Baek, Multi-task learning for real-time BSIM-CMG parameter extraction of NSFETs with multiple structural variations, IEEE Access, Vol. 12, pp. 184619 184630, Dec. 2024. [42] Y. Wei, J. Wei, Q. Wu, and H. Wang, Machine learning-assisted on-chip quadrilat- eral interleaved transformer automatic synthesis, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 70, No. 3, pp. 1 10, Oct. 2022. [43] E. A. Karahan, J. Zhou, Z. Liu, Z. Shao, S. Fisher, and K. Sengupta, Deep Learning Enabled Design of RF mmWave IC and Antennas, pp. 769 772, Aug. 2024. [44] W. Dai, L. Zhang, and X. Chen, Statistical compact modeling with artificial neural networks, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 42, No. 12, pp. 5156 5160, Jun. 2023. [45] Z. Yang, A. D. Gaidhane, K. Anderson, G. Workman, and Y. Cao, Graph-based compact model (GCM) for efficient transistor parameter extraction: A machine learning approach on 12 nm FinFETs, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, Vol. 71, No. 1, pp. 254 262, Nov. 2024. [46] E. Chang, J. Han, W. Bae, Z. Wang, N. Narevsky, B. Nikoli, and E. Alon, BAG2: A process-portable framework for generator-based AMS circuit design, pp. 1 8, May 2018. [47] O. Okobiah, S. Mohanty, and E. Kougianos, Fast Design Optimization Through Simple Kriging Metamodeling: A Sense Amplifier Case Study, IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp. 932 937, Apr. 2014. [48] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, CALT: Classification with Adaptive Labeling Thresholds for Analog Circuit Sizing, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, pp. 49 54, Nov. 2020. [49] K. Hakhamaneshi, N. Werblun, P. Abbeel, and V. Stojanovic, BagNet: Berkeley analog generator with layout optimizer boosted with deep neural networks, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 1 8, Jul. 2019. [50] Weidong Cao et al., RoSE-Opt: Robust and Efficient Analog Circuit Parameter Optimization with Knowledge-Infused Reinforcement Learning, IEEE Transac- tions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Jul. 2023. [51] A. F. Budak, P. Bhansali, B. Liu, N. Sun, D. Z. Pan, and C. V. Kashyap, DNN- Opt: An RL Inspired Optimization for Analog Circuit Sizing using Deep Neural Networks, Proceedings of the Design Automation Conference, p. 1219 1224, Dec. 2021. [52] Ahmet F. Budak, D. Smart, B. Swahn, and D. Z. Pan, APOSTLE: asynchronously parallel optimization for sizing analog transistors using DNN learning, Proceed- ings of the Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, pp. 70 75, Jan. 2023. [53] A. Gusmão, F. Passos, R. Póvoa, N. Horta, N. Lourenço, and R. Martins, Semi- Supervised Artificial Neural Networks towards Analog IC Placement Recom- mender, Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 1 5, Oct. 2020. [54] D. Guerra, A. Canelas, R. Póvoa, N. Horta, N. Lourenço, and R. Martins, Arti- ficial Neural Networks as an Alternative for Automatic Analog IC Placement, Proceedings of the International Conference on Synthesis, Modeling, Analysis and Simulation Methods and Applications to Circuit Design (SMACD), pp. 1 4, Jul. 2019. [55] A. Gusmão, R. Póvoa, N. Horta, N. Lourenço, and R. Martins, DeepPlacer: A Custom Integrated OpAmp Placement Tool Using Deep Models, Journal of Applied Soft Computing, Vol. 115, pp. 108188, Jan. 2022. [56] A. P. Lapas, N. Cavaco, N. Calado, and R. Miguel, Scalable and Order Invariant Analog Integrated Circuit Placement with Attention-based Graph-to-Sequence Deep Models, Journal of Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 207, pp. 117954, Jun, 2022. [57] K. Kunal, J. Poojary, T. Dhar, M. Madhusudan, R. Harjani, and S. S. Sapatnekar, A General Approach for Identifying Hierarchical Symmetry Constraints for Analog Circuit Layout, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design, pp. 1 8, Nov. 2020. [58] M. Liu, W. Li, K. Zhu, B. Xu, Y. Lin, L. Shen, X. Tang, N. Sun, and D. Z. Pan, S3DET: Detecting System Symmetry Constraints for Analog Circuits with Graph Similarity, Proceedings of the Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, pp. 193 198, Mar. 2020. [59] Yiding Wei, Jun Liu, Dengbao Sun, Guodong Su, and Junchao Wang, From Netlist to Manufacturable Layout: An Auto-Layout Algorithm Optimized for Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits, Symmetry, Jun. 2023. [60] E. A. Karahan, Z. Liu, and K. Sengupta, Deep-learning-based inverse-designed millimeter-wave passives and power amplifiers, IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 58, No. 11, pp. 3074 3088, Nov. 2023. [61] Design Rule Complexity Rising, 2023. [62] Nibedita Karmokar, Meghna Madhusudan, Arvind K. Sharma, Ramesh Harjani, Mark Po-Hung Lin, and Sachin S. Sapatnekar, Common-Centroid Layout for Active and Passive Devices: A Review and the Road Ahead, Proceedings of the Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, pp. 114 121, Jan. 2022. [63] Jaeduk Han, Woorham Bae, Eric Chang, Zhongkai Wang, Borivoje Nikolić, and Elad Alon, LAYGO: A Template-and-Grid-Based Layout Generation Engine for Advanced CMOS Technologies, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, Vol. 68, No. 3, pp. 1012 1022, Mar. 2021. [64] E. Yilmaz and G. Dundar, Analog layout generator for CMOS circuits, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 32 45, Dec. 2009. [65] Hao Chen, Mingjie Liu, Biying Xu, Keren Zhu, Xiyuan Tang, Shaolan Li, Yibo Lin, Nan Sun, and David Z. Pan, MAGICAL: An Open- Source Fully Automated Analog IC Layout System from Netlist to GDSII, IEEE Design Test, Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 19 26, Apr. 2021. [66] Keren Zhu, Mingjie Liu, Yibo Lin, Biying Xu, Shaolan Li, Xiyuan Tang, Nan Sun, and David Z. Pan, GeniusRoute: A New Analog Routing Paradigm Using Generative Neural Network Guidance, Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 1 8, Nov 2019. [67] Pang-Yen Chou, Nai-Chen Chen, Mark Po-Hung Lin, and Helmut Graeb, Matched-Routing Common-Centroid 3-D MOM Capacitors for Low-Power Data Converters, IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, Vol. 25, No. 8, pp. 2234 2247, Apr. 2017. [68] W. Shi, H. Wang, J. Gu, M. Liu, D. Z. Pan, S. Han, and N. Sun, RobustAnalog: Fast Variation-Aware Analog Circuit Design Via Multi-task RL, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, pp. 35 41, Sep. 2022. [69] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Variation-aware Analog Circuit Sizing with Classifier Chains, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, pp. 1 6, Sep. 2021. [70] X. Li, P. Gopalakrishnan, Y. Xu, and L. T. Pileggi, Robust Analog RF Circuit Design With Projection-Based Performance Modeling, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 2 15, December 2007. [71] T. McConaghy and G. G. E. Gielen, Globally Reliable Variation-Aware Sizing of Analog Integrated Circuits via Response Surfaces and Structural Homotopy, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 28, No. 11, pp. 1627 1640, Oct. 2009. [72] Po-Chun Wang, Mark Po-Hung Lin, Chien-Nan Jimmy Liu, and Hung-Ming Chen, Layout Synthesis of Analog Primitive Cells with Variational Autoencoder, Proceedings of the International Conference on Synthesis, Modeling, Analysis and Simulation Methods and Applications to Circuit Design (SMACD), pp. 1 4, Jul. 2023. [73] B. Cardoso, R. Martins, N. Lourenço, and N. Horta, AIDA-PEx: Accurate Parasitic Extraction for Layout-aware Analog Integrated Circuit Sizing, Proceedings of the Conference on Ph.D. Research in Microelectronics and Electronics, pp. 129 132, Jun. 2015. [74] B. Shook, P. Bhansali, C. Kashyap, C. Amin, and S. Joshi, MLParest: Machine Learning Based Parasitic Estimation for Custom Circuit Design, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Design Automation Conference, pp. 1 6, Mar. 2020. [75] H. Ren, G. F. Kokai, W. J. Turner, and T. Ku, ParaGraph: Layout Parasitics and Device Parameter Prediction Using Graph Neural Networks, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM Design Automation Conference, pp. 1 6, Nov. 2020. [76] K. Zhu, H. Chen, W. J. Turner, G. F. Kokai, P. Wei, D. Z. Pan, and H. Ren, TAG: Learning Circuit Spatial Embedding from Layouts, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 1 9, Oct. 2022. [77] Rongjian Liang, Zhiyao Xie, Jinwook Jung, Vishnavi Chauha, Yiran Chen, Jiang Hu, Hua Xiang, and Gi-Joon Nam, Routing-free crosstalk prediction, Proceedings Emerging ML-AI Techniques for Analog and RF EDA , of the International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, Dec. 2020. [78] V. A. Chhabria, W. Jiang, A. B. Kahng, and S. S. Sapatnekar, From Global Route to Detailed Route: ML for Fast and Accurate Wire Parasitics and Timing Prediction, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, pp. 7 14, Sep. 2022. [79] P. Shrestha and I. Savidis, Graph Representation Learning for Parasitic Impedance Prediction of the Interconnect, Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 1 5, May 2023. [80] T. Nguyen, B. Shi, H. Ma, E. Li, X. Chen, A. C. Cangellaris, and J. E. Schutt- Aine, Comparative study of surrogate modeling methods for signal integrity and microwave circuit applications, IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology, Vol. 11, pp. 1369 1379, Sep. 2021. [81] P. Shrestha, A. Aversa, S. Phatharodom, and I. Savidis, EDA-schema: A graph datamodel schema and open dataset for digital design automation, Proceedings of the ACM Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI, pp. 1 8, Jun. 2024. [82] P. Shrestha and I. Savidis, EDA-ML: Graph representation learning framework for digital IC design automation, Proceedings of the International Symposium on Quality Electronic Design, pp. 241 246, Apr. 2024. [83] J. Jung, A. B. Kahng, S. Kim, and R. Varadarajan, METRICS2.1 and flow tuning in the IEEE CEDA robust design flow and OpenROAD, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design, pp. 1 9, Nov. 2021. [84] Rongjian Liang, Anthony Agnesina, Geraldo Pradipta, Vidya A Chhabria, and Haoxing Ren, CircuitOps: An ML Infrastructure Enabling Generative AI for VLSI Circuit Optimization, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference on Computer Aided Design, pp. 1 6, 2023. [85] P. Shrestha, S. Phatharodom, A. Aversa, D. Blankenship, Z. Wu, and I. Savidis, Deep Representation Learning for Electronic Design Automation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02105, May 2025.\n\n=== SEGMENTS ===\n\n--- Segment 1 ---\nEmerging ML-AI Techniques for Analog and RF EDA Zhengfeng Wu Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Nnaemeka Achebe Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Ziyi Chen Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Vaibhav V. Rao Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Pratik Shrestha Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Ioannis Savidis Drexel University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Abstract This survey explores the integration of machine learning (ML) into EDA workflows for analog and RF circuits, addressing challenges unique to analog design, which include complex constraints, non- linear design spaces, and high computational costs. State-of-the-art learning and optimization techniques are reviewed for circuit tasks such as constraint formulation, topology generation, device mod- eling, sizing, placement, and routing. The survey highlights the capability of ML to enhance automation, improve design quality, and reduce time-to-market while meeting the target specifications of an analog or RF circuit. Emerging trends and cross-cutting chal- lenges, including robustness to variations and considerations of interconnect parasitics, are also discussed. Keywords Analog EDA, RF Design Automation, Machine Learning, AI in EDA 1 Introduction to ML-AI Techniques for Analog RF Design Automation Analog design remains a cornerstone of modern integrated circuits, accounting for approximately 20 of the chip area and 40 of the total IC design effort [1]. In addition, analog circuits contribute to approximately 50 of the costly design iterations that occur during development [1]. As analog and RF systems evolve toward higher frequencies and greater levels of integration, traditional knowledge- driven methods struggle to address the increasing computational and design complexities [2]. Electronic design automation (EDA) has transformed the design of an IC that allow for high-level circuit implementation strate- gies. However, while digital design has achieved high levels of abstraction and automation, analog design automation lags behind as analog circuits are highly customized [3]. Analog synthesis and physical design typically follows a hierarchical flow that includes topology generation, device sizing, layout generation, and post- layout verification. The challenges of automating analog design stem from the highly non-linear design space, computational com- plexity, and stringent performance and manufacturing constraints, which result in complex multi-objective optimization problems that require intricate trade-offs between competing circuit objectives [3].\n\n--- Segment 2 ---\nAnalog synthesis and physical design typically follows a hierarchical flow that includes topology generation, device sizing, layout generation, and post- layout verification. The challenges of automating analog design stem from the highly non-linear design space, computational com- plexity, and stringent performance and manufacturing constraints, which result in complex multi-objective optimization problems that require intricate trade-offs between competing circuit objectives [3]. Recent advances in machine learning (ML) offer promising solu- tions, allowing for the accurate prediction of critical circuit param- eters and the guidance of early-stage design decisions. Data-driven methods have been proposed to enhance productivity and improve the quality of design provided by EDA workflows. This survey explores the integration of ML in analog EDA, cover- ing both synthesis and physical design tasks. In Section II, a review of learning and optimization algorithms is provided. A discussion of ML-based algorithms for analog circuit synthesis and physical design tasks is provided in Section III. Cross-cutting challenges, including parasitic-aware design and variation effects are described in Section IV. Finally, the importance of standardized benchmarks and datasets to drive further innovation in ML-driven analog EDA is discussed in Section V. 2 Overview of Learning and Optimization Algorithms for Analog EDA In this section, an overview is provided on the learning and op- timization algorithms utilized for analog circuit design. Learning models map from circuit features and design variables to target performance parameters, enabling informed decisions during early design stages and reducing reliance on costly simulations. The learning models are usually applied as surrogates of the design space that guide optimization algorithms. Learning techniques including statistical models, neural net- works, and transfer learning for circuit modeling tasks are intro- duced in Section II-A. In Section II-B, methods including Bayesian optimization and reinforcement learning are described that are uti- lized to optimize complex analog design spaces. An overview of applying ML algorithms for the synthesis and physical design of analog circuits is shown in Fig. 1. 2.1 Learning Learning algorithms include statistical and neural network based methods. A description of both follows. 2.1.1 Statistical Learning Algorithms Statistical learning methods, including linear regression, support vector machines [4], and tree- based models such as random forests and gradient boosting [5], have been widely used for analog design tasks. The statistical learning methods have proven to be effective when computational resources are limited and available data is sparse.\n\n--- Segment 3 ---\n2.1.1 Statistical Learning Algorithms Statistical learning methods, including linear regression, support vector machines [4], and tree- based models such as random forests and gradient boosting [5], have been widely used for analog design tasks. The statistical learning methods have proven to be effective when computational resources are limited and available data is sparse. The interpretability pro- vided by statistical learning models, including the analysis of the importance of features and the visualization of decision processes such as the structure of a tree, provide benefit when analyzing the relationships amongst design parameters [5, 6]. , Zhengfeng Wu, Nnaemeka Achebe, Ziyi Chen, Vaibhav V. Rao, Pratik Shrestha, and Ioannis Savidis Figure 1: An overview of applying machine learning for the synthesis and physical design of an analog and RF circuit. 2.1.2 Neural Network-Based Approaches Over the past ten years, neural network-based approaches have gained traction in analog design automation, beginning with the versatile multi-layer percep- tron (MLP) [7]. More recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) [8 11] have shown significant promise in learning circuit connectivity and topological features. For graph representations to model analog circuit behaviors at the device level, vertices often represent active and passive devices, while edges represent nets [8, 9]. However, some models treat both devices and nets as nodes when intercon- nect features are emphasized for better prediction or optimization performance [10, 11]. Generative adversarial networks (GAN) have also been applied to guide the routing of an analog IC [12]. Transfer learning permits the reuse of pre-trained model layers on new tasks [13], during either standalone model training [14] or execution of optimization [15]. Transfer learning allows for the gen- eralization of models across circuit design objectives including for different technology nodes and different circuit topologies [14 16], which reduces data requirements and improves model performance. 2.2 Optimization Two classes of optimization algorithms include classic methods and surrogate-assisted. A discussion of each follows. 2.2.1 Classic Optimization Algorithms Algorithms based on gra- dient descent are computationally efficient and are often used for problems with differentiable cost functions [17]. However, the al- gorithms are limited by potential convergence to local minima, especially in non-convex design spaces.\n\n--- Segment 4 ---\n2.2.1 Classic Optimization Algorithms Algorithms based on gra- dient descent are computationally efficient and are often used for problems with differentiable cost functions [17]. However, the al- gorithms are limited by potential convergence to local minima, especially in non-convex design spaces. Optimization utilizing heuristic-based evolution algorithms, in- cluding simulated annealing, particle swarm optimization, and ge- netic algorithms [18], allow for a global exploration of the design space. Genetic algorithms apply principles of evolution to itera- tively refine populations of design candidates through crossover and mutation operations [18]. 2.2.2 Surrogate-Assisted Optimization Algorithms that perform surrogate-assisted optimization, including Bayesian optimization (BO) [19, 20], more efficiently explore the design space by utilizing surrogate models like Gaussian processes to approximate expensive cost functions. The search process, therefore, proceeds with fewer costly evaluations of the design space. Reinforcement learning (RL) [15, 21] has been explored for opti- mization in a sequentially executed decision-making flow. In RL, an agent iteratively interacts with the circuit simulation environ- ment and refines actions to maximize cumulative rewards based on results returned from the simulation framework. Emerging ML-AI Techniques for Analog and RF EDA , 2.3 Large Language Models for Analog EDA Since 2023, large language models (LLMs) have emerged as promis- ing tools to address the challenges in design [22 24]. LLMs excel in processing unstructured inputs, such as textual specifications, and translating high-level requirements into actionable design strate- gies. LLMs have been applied to recognize patterns in circuit data, predict relationships between parameters and performance, gen- erate topologies, and derive sizing specifications based on prior knowledge [22 24]. In addition, LLMs integrate with optimization algorithms including BO and RL to iteratively determine and refine solutions that meet design objectives [22, 23]. LLMs also provide an intuitive and accessible interface, lowering the barrier to entry for EDA tool users. 3 Data-Driven and Heuristic Approaches for Analog Circuit Synthesis and Physical Design Analog and RF circuit synthesis and physical design involve a di- verse set of tasks, which include defining design constraints, gener- ating topologies, modeling devices, sizing circuits, and optimizing layouts.\n\n--- Segment 5 ---\nLLMs also provide an intuitive and accessible interface, lowering the barrier to entry for EDA tool users. 3 Data-Driven and Heuristic Approaches for Analog Circuit Synthesis and Physical Design Analog and RF circuit synthesis and physical design involve a di- verse set of tasks, which include defining design constraints, gener- ating topologies, modeling devices, sizing circuits, and optimizing layouts. Unlike digital design, nuanced constraints such as device matching, symmetry, parasitic effects, and noise isolation must be considered. An overview of heuristic and ML-based approaches for analog RF synthesis and physical design is provided in this section. 3.1 Defining Constraints and Design Specifications Primitives including differential pairs and current mirrors form the basis of an analog circuit. Accurate recognition of circuit hierar- chies is required to properly extract constraints on the symmetry of devices when generating a physical layout. The detected symmetri- cal device groupings also provide supplemental information when utilized as features in ML models for downstream circuit modeling and optimization tasks. Traditional methods rely on isomorphism matching between cir- cuit graphs and primitive libraries [25, 26], with some approaches dynamically constructing libraries during execution [27]. More recently, learning-based methods that utilize GNNs have been pro- posed to classify hierarchical circuit levels [10], predict graph edit distances [28], and detect circuit substructures [29]. Heterogeneous GNNs predict device and system-level symmetries by capturing topological features [30]. To return the specific circuit category of a detected functional group, hybrid approaches that combine GNNs with subgraph isomorphism[31] have been proposed. A compara- tive analysis of heuristic isomorphism-based and learning-based algorithms that recognize hierarchy is provided in [32]. 3.2 Automated Topology Generation for Analog Circuits Given a set of specifications, the design of an analog circuit begins with the synthesis of a circuit topology, which traditionally requires extensive human expertise and intuition [33]. Automating topology selection and generation is computationally expensive due to the large search space [34]. Exploring all possible topologies is neither practical nor efficient. Although the infusion of prior knowledge through a pre-defined topology library narrows the design space, the discovery of novel topologies is limited. A scalable and effi- cient solution for topology synthesis in analog design is yet to be provided.\n\n--- Segment 6 ---\nAlthough the infusion of prior knowledge through a pre-defined topology library narrows the design space, the discovery of novel topologies is limited. A scalable and effi- cient solution for topology synthesis in analog design is yet to be provided. Techniques that generate analog circuit topologies are catego- rized into knowledge-based methods and evolutionary algorithm- based methods [34]. With knowledge-based methods, circuit com- ponents are systematically assembled according to predefined rules. Bell Laboratories Analog Design Expert System (BLADES) [35] is a knowledge-based algorithm that integrates formal mathematical methods with heuristic reasoning. A graph-based circuit topology generator is proposed that generates candidate topologies as hierar- chical tree structures, guided by graph grammar rules and building blocks from a predefined library [36]. Evolutionary algorithms utilize a stochastic exploration process to address high-dimensional, discrete multi-objective tasks. In [37], circuit topologies are encoded as connection matrices and value vectors, where crossover and mutation are applied to explore a vast design space of up to 1019 possible configurations. In [33], a seg- mented evolution strategy is proposed that progressively refines the topology using a genetic algorithm while optimizing for objectives that include performance, component reduction, and area. Hybrid approaches that integrate both heuristic and ML methods are increasingly being explored. A technique is proposed [21] that combines reinforcement learning techniques with a policy gradient neural network to iteratively construct circuit topologies using predefined building blocks, while the performance is evaluated using symbolic analysis and SPICE simulations. 3.3 Device Modeling and Synthesis of EM Structures Modeling, design, and optimization of active and passive devices as well as electromagnetic (EM) structures is required for analog RF cir- cuit design. Traditional modeling of EM structures relies on highly accurate mathematical calculations, which include use of finite ele- ment methods (FEM) and method of moments (MoM) to compute EM fields. However, the solvers are computationally costly, particu- larly for novel devices such as FinFET and gate-all-around transis- tors, which hinders design technology co-optimization (DTCO)[38]. ML has emerged as an effective tool to enhance traditional modeling methods by improving prediction accuracy and reducing computa- tional cost.\n\n--- Segment 7 ---\nHowever, the solvers are computationally costly, particu- larly for novel devices such as FinFET and gate-all-around transis- tors, which hinders design technology co-optimization (DTCO)[38]. ML has emerged as an effective tool to enhance traditional modeling methods by improving prediction accuracy and reducing computa- tional cost. ML has been applied for the accurate modeling and represen- tation of parameters of devices and EM structures, where param- eters including resonant frequency, bandwidth, and impedance directly impact performance. In [39], ML is applied to predict the current and capacitance of FinFETs based on other device parame- ters. An autoencoder-based approach is utilized to develop a PIN diode model, utilizing unsupervised learning to compress high- dimensional data into a latent space[40], which accelerates the extraction of device parameters. In [41], an ANN is introduced that performs real-time BSIM parameter extraction in nanosheet FETs, while accounting for multiple structural variations. For the modeling of EM structures, an on-chip transformer au- tomatic synthesis (OTAS) flow is proposed in [42] that utilizes Gaussian process regression models to automate the translation of , Zhengfeng Wu, Nnaemeka Achebe, Ziyi Chen, Vaibhav V. Rao, Pratik Shrestha, and Ioannis Savidis system requirements into transformer design parameters, reduc- ing the effort required for impedance matching. Similarly, recent work on deep learning-enabled mmWave power amplifier (PA) and antenna design has shown translations from high-level design specifications to physical layouts[43]. Physics-based device equations have been integrated with ML models to align model predictions with known device behaviors. In [44], analytical equations process variations such as current shifts and threshold voltage shifts are integrated into the learning models. A graph-based compact model (GCM) is proposed in [45] that represents physical parameters, including threshold voltages and channel length dependence, as graph nodes. Implemented in Verilog-A, GCM provides accurate predictions with 300 sample points, while passing industry-standard benchmark tests. GCM is integrated with SPICE simulations, offering a computationally efficient approach to advanced transistor modeling.\n\n--- Segment 8 ---\nImplemented in Verilog-A, GCM provides accurate predictions with 300 sample points, while passing industry-standard benchmark tests. GCM is integrated with SPICE simulations, offering a computationally efficient approach to advanced transistor modeling. 3.4 Analog RF Performance Modeling and Device Sizing Determining the optimal sizes of analog devices, including tran- sistors, diodes, resistors, capacitors, and inductors, ensures that the chosen topology satisfies the design specifications. The early methods that sized devices are based on solving analytical equa- tions that establish relationships between design parameters and performance metrics, where multi-objective optimization problems are formulated [46] [18]. As technology scales, knowledge-based methods face limitations due to the growing complexity of circuit equations and the effort required to reconcile discrepancies between theoretical optimizations and simulation results. Using data from simulation, data-driven techniques are utilized in a bottom-up approach to model circuit behaviors and extract design insights. Early automated sizing techniques are based on statistical learning methods [2, 47]. In [47], a statistical learning method is proposed that combines Kriging metamodeling with simulated annealing to optimize a sense amplifier. In CALT [48], random forest classifiers are used as surrogate models of circuit parameters and genetic algorithms are used to predict whether de- signs meet specified performance thresholds. More recently, neural networks have been applied with optimization algorithms [7, 49]. Reinforcement learning [15, 50, 51] and Bayesian optimization [20] are state-of-the-art optimization engines for analog device sizing. With the RL framework proposed in DNN-Opt [51], an actor net- work is utilized for tuning design parameters and a critic network is applied for predicting performance parameters, which results in up to a 24x reduction in the number of executed SPICE simulations. GNNs are integrated into RL-based search in [15] and [50], where circuit topology information is included for optimization. To accelerate the execution of sizing algorithms, techniques have been proposed that allow parallelization. When the simulation time for a given set of design variables is constant, parallel execution is leveraged for algorithms compatible with multi-core simulators, whereas those relying on sequential decision-making remain serial.\n\n--- Segment 9 ---\nTo accelerate the execution of sizing algorithms, techniques have been proposed that allow parallelization. When the simulation time for a given set of design variables is constant, parallel execution is leveraged for algorithms compatible with multi-core simulators, whereas those relying on sequential decision-making remain serial. A batch-constrained Bayesian optimization (BO) methodology is proposed in [20] that utilizes a multi-objective acquisition function ensemble as a substitute of the sequential execution of traditional BO. An asynchronously parallel batch optimization method for analog sizing is proposed in [52] that utilizes a ranking approxima- tion method to select between cheap and expensive simulations of circuit parameters. Another emerging research direction is layout-driven device siz- ing [52], which includes an iterative design loop between schematic- level sizing and layout generation, minimizing the need for addi- tional post-layout adjustments. 3.5 Placement Optimization in Analog Design Analog IC placement involves determining the optimal locations for devices within a given circuit topology to optimize specific perfor- mance metrics. The placement algorithm must adhere to topological constraints, including device matching, symmetry between devices or device groups, and proximity requirements. Depending on the target application, constraints that include alignment, thermal gra- dients, or current signal flows must also be met [3]. Traditional analog circuit placement methodologies have been mostly manual, leading to an increase in circuit development time and cost. ML-based approaches proposed in [53 56] utilize ANNs and deep generative models to provide an optimum placement of a circuit while considering topological constraints. In [53, 54], a non- linear ANN model is proposed that is trained with semi-supervised learning. The ANN outputs the placement coordinates of each cell (sub-block) for a given sizing and set of topological constraints. DeepPlacer, a deep learning generative model, is proposed that performs the placement of multiple amplifier topologies in less than 150 ms across different technology nodes [55], proving the scalability of ML-based placement methodologies. Unsupervised models including AGraph2Seq introduce structure through an attention-based graph-to-sequence encoder-decoder ar- chitecture that enables efficient placement of analog circuit blocks with a minimal set of trainable parameters [56].\n\n--- Segment 10 ---\nDeepPlacer, a deep learning generative model, is proposed that performs the placement of multiple amplifier topologies in less than 150 ms across different technology nodes [55], proving the scalability of ML-based placement methodologies. Unsupervised models including AGraph2Seq introduce structure through an attention-based graph-to-sequence encoder-decoder ar- chitecture that enables efficient placement of analog circuit blocks with a minimal set of trainable parameters [56]. The AGraph2Seq methodology encodes the topological constraints of the circuit us- ing relational GCNs and a long short-term memory (LSTM) decoder, which outputs the position of a device considering the relative po- sitions of the devices that have already been placed. Graph-based ML techniques proposed in [57] and [58] explore hierarchical circuit decomposition and identifying symmetry con- straints for physical placement. In [57], a GNN based on a neural tensor network is integrated with exact graph matching to account for multi-level symmetrical hierarchies when performing place- ment. In [12], 𝑊𝑒𝑙𝑙𝐺𝐴𝑁is proposed, which is a generative adver- sarial network (GAN) that is trained on high quality layouts that are manually generated. A conditional GAN is utilized to generate analog layouts that mimick the target circuit behavior. For RF placement, a depth-first device placement strategy is proposed in [59] that utilizes parameterized cells. A decision tree model identifies the coordinates of placed devices, rotation angles, and mirror operations. Precise pin positions and alignment in rout- ing are computed using analytical models. Constraints including impedance matching and electromagnetic performance are con- sidered. For instance, a 5-ring LNA (6 13 GHz) was placed in 86 ms. The generated RF layout provides improved performance over layouts generated with Keysight ADS. Millimeter-wave power amplifiers, passives, and EM structures are physically placed utilizing a deep-learning-based inverse design Emerging ML-AI Techniques for Analog and RF EDA , framework [60]. A convolutional neural network (CNN) is utilized to predict scattering parameters for 2 D planar structures, while a genetic algorithm optimizes the spatial configuration [60].\n\n--- Segment 11 ---\nMillimeter-wave power amplifiers, passives, and EM structures are physically placed utilizing a deep-learning-based inverse design Emerging ML-AI Techniques for Analog and RF EDA , framework [60]. A convolutional neural network (CNN) is utilized to predict scattering parameters for 2 D planar structures, while a genetic algorithm optimizes the spatial configuration [60]. The generated power amplifier achieves a power added efficiency (PAE) of 16 -24.7 across a 3-dB bandwidth of 30-94 GHz. The approach expands the design space beyond pre-defined templates, achieving efficiency performance in less time. 3.6 Routing Strategies in Analog RF Design Automation Routing significantly impacts the performance and manufacturabil- ity of a circuit. While the core objective of routing algorithms is to find the shortest physical path between two connected nodes of a graph, routing for analog and RF circuits must address additional performance-critical constraints including symmetry, minimiza- tion of parasitic impedances, and noise isolation, while adhering to geometric and electrical design rules. Analog routing is, therefore, a complex optimization problem despite the smaller number of devices. In addition, for fabrication technology nodes below 22 nm, the complexity of design rules has increased nearly tenfold, surpass- ing 10,000 rules [61]. The increase in circuit and design constraints requires novel methodologies to efficiently achieve optimal routing of analog and RF circuits. Analog routing techniques share similarities with digital routing, utilizing maze routing, A , integer linear programming (ILP), SAT- based, and ML-guided algorithms. Common-centroid (CC) rout- ing [62] is introduced to mitigate mismatch due to systematic varia- tions. Circuit layouts that utilize CC routing ensure that systematic variations across a linear gradient are mitigated by symmetrically placed elements. However, CC layouts often introduce complex routing challenges and increased parasitic effects due to the intri- cate routing paths required to interconnect symmetric elements. BAG2 [46] integrates modularity and process portability into the routing strategy, using separate engines to automate wire place- ment, spacing, and layer selection. By isolating process-specific details with the developed parametric workflow, BAG2 adapts de- signs across technology nodes while balancing automated layout generation with designer input. Similarly, LAYGO [63] utilizes a grid-based and template-driven routing algorithm developed for sub-28 nm technology nodes.\n\n--- Segment 12 ---\nBy isolating process-specific details with the developed parametric workflow, BAG2 adapts de- signs across technology nodes while balancing automated layout generation with designer input. Similarly, LAYGO [63] utilizes a grid-based and template-driven routing algorithm developed for sub-28 nm technology nodes. The algorithm abstracts the complex- ity of design rules by using predefined templates, grids, and relative placements to achieve design rule compliance and improved routing results. A two-step approach is implemented in ALG [64], which com- bines global and local routing with sensitivity analysis. Global routing ensures adherence to performance constraints including symmetry and matching, while local maze routing optimizes paths while accounting for complex constraints that include crosstalk and planarity. While effective, maze routing sacrifices efficiency for precision, which results in potential trade-offs in wirelength and algorithmic execution time. MAGICAL [65] integrates constraint-aware and symmetry-driven routing with placement. Using an A algorithm for detailed routing, symmetry constraints extracted from the netlist are enforced, en- suring electrical balance in critical nets such as for differential pairs. Based on the base router, GeniusRoute [66] leverages variational autoencoders to mimic human design expertise, combining proba- bilistic routing path selection with the detailed routing provided by A . The hybrid approach is robust and scalable, however, there is a dependence on the quality of the training data and heuristic functions. ALIGN [3] utilizes a hierarchical routing method that combines ILP and SAT algorithms. GNNs are utilized to extract and enforce electrical and geometric constraints [3]. As a result, a global op- timization of symmetry, coupling noise, and length matching is provided. However, the hierarchical routing algorithm is less scal- able due to the computational expense of solving large optimization problems. In [67], a variational autoencoder (VAE) is utilized to learn and generate routes for analog building blocks. The routing paths are ex- tracted from legacy layouts. The VAE models are trained to encode placement and routing features. By applying LLMs, GLayout [24] translates human language input of analog layout specifications into compact technology- generic layouts. Using retrieval augmented generation (RAG) and fine-tuned LLMs, GLayout achieves 70 task completion with 44 of generated layouts passing DRC and LVS verification for circuits containing blocks with up to 4 transistors.\n\n--- Segment 13 ---\nBy applying LLMs, GLayout [24] translates human language input of analog layout specifications into compact technology- generic layouts. Using retrieval augmented generation (RAG) and fine-tuned LLMs, GLayout achieves 70 task completion with 44 of generated layouts passing DRC and LVS verification for circuits containing blocks with up to 4 transistors. 4 Cross-Cutting Challenges in Analog RF Design Analog and RF circuit design faces cross-cutting challenges that im- pact all stages of the design flow. Key challenges include variations in process, voltage, and temperature (PVT), as well as variations due to aging, parasitics, and manufacturing effects. A survey of techniques that address the cross-cutting challenges is provided. 4.1 Designing for Variation and Yield A robust analog circuit compensates for process, voltage, tempera- ture, and aging variations to provide consistent performance that matches the target specifications. RobustAnalog[68] utilizes a multi- tasking RL engine, where each type of variation is assigned as a single task. A clustering algorithm is executed that groups tasks based on the difference between the current performance of the circuit and the target performance. In [69], the authors propose a simulation-based optimization framework for analog circuit sizing to ensure that both the target performance and the robustness specifications are met by limiting variations in performance across process and temperature corners. In [70], transistor-level simulations, geometric programming, and projection-based performance modeling are utilized to optimize circuits when considering process and environmental variations, which results in a trade-off between yield and performance. In [71], adaptive response surface modeling and structural homotopy are utilized for globally reliable, variation-aware sizing, leveraging stochastic gradient boosting and automated execution of SPICE simulations to optimize a complex, high-dimensional design space. 4.2 Modeling of Parasitic Impedance in Analog RF Circuits The parasitic extraction (PEX) of a circuit layout provides accuracy at the cost of high computational overhead [73].\n\n--- Segment 14 ---\nIn [71], adaptive response surface modeling and structural homotopy are utilized for globally reliable, variation-aware sizing, leveraging stochastic gradient boosting and automated execution of SPICE simulations to optimize a complex, high-dimensional design space. 4.2 Modeling of Parasitic Impedance in Analog RF Circuits The parasitic extraction (PEX) of a circuit layout provides accuracy at the cost of high computational overhead [73]. The capacitance , Zhengfeng Wu, Nnaemeka Achebe, Ziyi Chen, Vaibhav V. Rao, Pratik Shrestha, and Ioannis Savidis Machine Learning Algorithms Utilized in Analog RF EDA Routing ML-Guided Routing [24, 65, 67] ILP and SAT-Based Routing [3] Maze and A Algorithms [64, 65] Common-Centroid Routing [72] Grid and Template-Based Methods [63] Placement Technology-Specific Placement [59, 60] Unsupervised Models [56] Deep Generative Models [12, 55] Graph-Based Methods [57, 58] Analog-Specific ML Models [53, 54] Circuit Performance Modeling and Device Sizing Parallelized Optimization [20, 52] Reinforcement Learning [50, 51] Bayesian Optimization [20] Statistical Methods [2, 47, 48] Device Modeling and EM Structure Synthesis Physics-Integrated Models [44, 45] ML for EM Structures [42, 43] ML-Based Parameter Extraction [39 41] Traditional Modeling Techniques [38] Topology Generation Reinforcement Learning [21] Evolutionary Algorithms [33, 37] Knowledge-Based Methods [35, 36] Hierarchy Recognition and Constraint Formulation Hybrid Approaches [31, 32] Graph-Based Methods [10, 28 30] Challenges Circuit Variations [68 71] Layout Effects [73 76] Matching Parasitics [75 77] Signal Integrity [77] Manufacturability [70, 71] Parallelization [68] Figure 2: Overview of ML applications and algorithms for analog RF circuit design. Cross-cutting challenges that impact all tasks are also highlighted. of an interconnect is reported in standard formats that include DSPF and SPEF. A simplified model of the total capacitance of an interconnect consists of a lumped value to ground and the coupling between neighboring lines.\n\n--- Segment 15 ---\nof an interconnect is reported in standard formats that include DSPF and SPEF. A simplified model of the total capacitance of an interconnect consists of a lumped value to ground and the coupling between neighboring lines. ML has been applied to predict interconnect impedance in dig- ital circuits [78, 79]. For analog design, random forests [74] and GNNs [75] have been applied for schematic-level parasitic esti- mation, capturing both device and interconnect parameters. Re- cent papers incorporate spatial features within the GNN module for post-placement capacitance prediction, utilizing self-attention mechanisms to predict the pairwise distances between devices [76] and edge-weighted GNNs learning from the pairwise distances be- tween devices [75]. The ML-based methods improve efficiency by reducing dependence on PEX, while providing accurate estimates of parasitics at multiple design stages and combining schematic and spatial features. An accurate prediction of the coupling capaci- tance is significantly more challenging than estimating the physical capacitance to ground. A classifier is utilized in [77] to identify heavily coupled nets prior to routing, which allows for the early mitigation of flagged timing paths. Emerging ML-AI Techniques for Analog and RF EDA , While ML-based interconnect models are effective for low-frequency (a few GHz) analog circuits, the models are inadequate at RF fre- quencies as interconnects behave like transmission lines rather than lumped resistors or capacitors. Dedicated matching networks, such as distributed LC component models and transmission line stubs, are implemented to achieve proper impedance matching, while ensuring the maximum power transfer and the minimal signal re- flection [80]. Surrogate models of Gaussian processes are utilized to represent a high-speed channel, a millimeter-wave filter, and a low- noise amplifier [80]. Despite advancements in ML-based parasitic modeling, further exploration is needed to extend ML techniques to RF impedance modeling. 5 Standardization and Open Benchmark Dataset for Analog RF ML-EDA When applying ML to analog design, an important challenge to address is the lack of standardization in data, workflows, and eval- uation protocols. For example, analog sizing techniques are com- monly evaluated on OTAs that are inconsistently characterized across different technologies.\n\n--- Segment 16 ---\n5 Standardization and Open Benchmark Dataset for Analog RF ML-EDA When applying ML to analog design, an important challenge to address is the lack of standardization in data, workflows, and eval- uation protocols. For example, analog sizing techniques are com- monly evaluated on OTAs that are inconsistently characterized across different technologies. Due to the lack of standardization, a fair comparison between newly proposed techniques is challenging to perform and often errorneously completed [81]. Efforts in digital EDA [81 85] have highlighted the importance of unified frameworks and open datasets for the application of ML to EDA problems. Establishing uniform benchmarks and evaluation criteria for analog design will improve comparability, reproducibil- ity, and model reusability of workflows while addressing limitations due to dataset and PDK disparities. 6 Concluding Remarks ML has proven to be a powerful tool in improving productivity and design quality in analog and RF circuit design, complement- ing, rather than replacing, traditional techniques. A summary of heuristic and ML-based techniques for each circuit task is shown in Fig. 2. The infusion of ML AI reduces the traditionally steep learning curve needed in analog and RF design. References [1] IBS Corporation, IBS Corporation, Industry Reports, 2003. [2] R. Phelps, M. Krasnicki, R. A. Rutenbar, R. Carley, and J. R. Hellums, Anaconda: Simulation-based Synthesis of Analog Circuits via Stochastic Pattern Search, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 19, No. 6, pp. 703 717, Jul. 2000. [3] Tonmoy Dhar, Kishor Kunal, Yaguang Li, Meghna Madhusudan, Jitesh Poojary, Arvind K. Sharma, Wenbin Xu, Steven M. Burns, Ramesh Harjani, Jiang Hu, Desmond A. Kirkpatrick, Parijat Mukherjee, Soner Yaldiz, and Sachin S. Sapat- nekar, ALIGN: A System for Automating Analog Layout, IEEE Design Test, Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 8 18, Apr. 2021.\n\n--- Segment 17 ---\n8 18, Apr. 2021. [4] F. Bernardinis, M. Jordan, and A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, Support vector machines for analog circuit performance representation, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM Design Automation Conference, pp. 964 969, Jan. 2003. [5] T. Ho, A data complexity analysis of comparative advantages of decision forest constructors, Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Applications, Springer, Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 102 112, Jun. 2002. [6] T. Mcconaghy, P. Palmers, G. Gielen, and M. Steyaert, Automated extraction of expert knowledge in analog topology selection and sizing, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 392 395, Nov. 2008. [7] Y. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Li, R. Zhou, and Z. Lin, An artificial neural network assisted optimization system for analog design space exploration, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 39, No. 10, pp. 2640 2653, Oct. 2020. [8] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Circuit-GNN: A Graph Neural Network for Transistor-Level Modeling of Analog Circuit Hierarchies, Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 1 5, May. 2023. [9] Y. Li, Y. Lin, M. Madhusudan, A. Sharma, W. Xu, S. S. Sapatnekar, R. Harjani, and J. Hu, A Customized Graph Neural Network Model for Guiding Analog IC Placement, Proceedings of the International Conference On Computer Aided Design, pp. 1 9, Nov. 2020. [10] K. Kunal, T. Dhar, M. Madhusudan, J. Poojary, A. Sharma, W. Xu, S. M. Burns, J. Hu, R. Harjani, and S. S. Sapatnekar, GANA: Graph Convolutional Network Based Automated Netlist Annotation for Analog Circuits, Proceedings of the Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition, pp. 55 60, Mar. 2020.\n\n--- Segment 18 ---\n55 60, Mar. 2020. [11] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Edge-weighted graph neural networks for post-placement interconnect capacitance estimation of analog circuits, IEEE International Sym- posium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 1 5, May 2024. [12] B. Xu, Y. Lin, X. Tang, S. Li, L. Shen, N. Sun, and D. Z. Pan, WellGAN: Generative- Adversarial-Network-Guided Well Generation for Analog Mixed-Signal Circuit Layout, Proceedings of the Annual Design Automation Conference, pp. 1 6, Jun. 2019. [13] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, A Survey on Transfer Learning, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, Vol. 22, No. 10, pp. 1345 1359, Oct. 2010. [14] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Transfer Learning for Reuse of Analog Circuit Sizing Models Across Technology Nodes, IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 1 5, Jun. 2022. [15] H. Wang, K. Wang, J. Yang, L. Shen, N. Sun, H. Lee, and H. Song, GCN-RL Circuit Designer: Transferable Transistor Sizing with Graph Neural Networks and Reinforcement Learning, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM Design Automation Conference, pp. 1 6, Jul. 2020. [16] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Transfer of Performance Models Across Analog Circuit Topologies with Graph Neural Networks, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, pp. 159 165, Sep. 2022. [17] A. R. Conn, R. A. Haring, C. Visweswariah, and C. W. Wu, Circuit optimization via adjoint Lagrangians, Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Computer Aided Design, pp. 281 288, 1997. [18] M. Barros, J. Guilherme, and N. Horta, Analog circuits optimization based on evolutionary computation techniques, Proceedings of the Integration, the VLSI Journal, Vol. 43, No. 1, pp. 136 155, Jan. 2010.\n\n--- Segment 19 ---\n1, pp. 136 155, Jan. 2010. [19] Z. Gao, J. Tao, F. Yang, Y. Su, D. Zhou, and X. Zeng, Efficient performance trade- off modeling for analog circuit based on Bayesian neural network, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 1 8, Nov. 2019. [20] S. Zhang, F. Yang, C. Yan, D. Zhou, and X. Zeng, An Efficient Batch-Constrained Bayesian Optimization Approach for Analog Circuit Synthesis via Multiobjective Acquisition Ensemble, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 1 14, Jan. 2022. [21] Z. Zhao and L. Zhang, Analog Integrated Circuit Topology Synthesis With Deep Reinforcement Learning, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 41, pp. 5138 5151, December 2022. [22] C. Liu, W. Chen, A. Peng, Y. Du, L. Du, and J. Yang, AmpAgent: An LLM-based Multi-Agent System for Multi-stage Amplifier Schematic Design from Literature for Process and Performance Porting, arXiv, 2024. [23] Y. Yin, Y. Wang, B. Xu, and P. Li, ADO-LLM: Analog Design Bayesian Optimiza- tion with In-Context Learning of Large Language Models, arXiv, 2024. [24] A. Hammoud et al., Human Language to Analog Layout Using GLayout Lay- out Automation Framework, ACM IEEE Symposium on Machine Learning for Computer Aided Design, Sep. 2024. [25] M. E. Kole, J. Smit, and O. E. Herrmann, Modeling Symmetry in Analog Electronic Circuits, Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 315 318, Jun. 1994. [26] M. Eick, M. Strasser, K. Lu, U. Schlichtmann, and H. E. Graeb, Comprehensive Generation of Hierarchical Placement Rules for Analog Integrated Circuits, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 30, No.\n\n--- Segment 20 ---\n[26] M. Eick, M. Strasser, K. Lu, U. Schlichtmann, and H. E. Graeb, Comprehensive Generation of Hierarchical Placement Rules for Analog Integrated Circuits, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 180 193, Jan. 2011. [27] M. Neuner, I. Abel, and H. Graeb, Library-free Structure Recognition for Analog Circuits, Proceedings of the Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition, pp. 1366 1371, Feb. 2021. [28] K. Kunal, J. Poojary, T. Dhar, M. Madhusudan, R. Harjani, and S. S. Sapatnekar, A General Approach for Identifying Hierarchical Symmetry Constraints for Analog Circuit Layout, Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 1 8, Nov. 2020. [29] K. Settaluri and E. Fallon, Fully Automated Analog Sub-circuit Clustering with Graph Convolutional Neural Networks, Proceedings of the Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition, pp. 1714 1715, Mar. 2020. [30] H. Chen, K. Zhu, M. Liu, X. Tang, N. Sun, and D. Z. Pan, Universal Symmetry Constraint Extraction for Analog and Mixed-signal Circuits with Graph Neural Networks, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Design Automation Conference, pp. 1243 1248, Dec. 2021. , Zhengfeng Wu, Nnaemeka Achebe, Ziyi Chen, Vaibhav V. Rao, Pratik Shrestha, and Ioannis Savidis [31] Z. Wu, I. Song, and I. Savidis, Hybrid Utilization of Subgraph Isomorphism and Relational Graph Convolutional Networks for Analog Functional Grouping Annotation, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for Computer Aided Design, pp. 1 6, Sep. 2023. [32] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Comparative Analysis of Graph Isomorphism and Graph Neural Networks for Analog Hierarchy Labeling, International Symposium on Quality Electronic Design, pp.\n\n--- Segment 21 ---\n1 6, Sep. 2023. [32] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Comparative Analysis of Graph Isomorphism and Graph Neural Networks for Analog Hierarchy Labeling, International Symposium on Quality Electronic Design, pp. 1 7, Apr. 2024. [33] M. Campilho-Gomes, R. Tavares, and J. Goes, Analog Flat-Level Circuit Synthesis With Genetic Algorithms, IEEE Access, Vol. 12, pp. 115532 115545, Aug. 2024. [34] Z. Zhao and L. Zhang, An Automated Topology Synthesis Framework for Analog Integrated Circuits, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 39, pp. 4325 4337, December 2020. [35] F. El-Turky and E. E. Perry, BLADES: An artificial intelligence approach to analog circuit design, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 8, pp. 680 692, June 1989. [36] Z. Zhao and L. Zhang, Graph-Grammar-Based Analog Circuit Topology Syn- thesis, Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, Sapporo, Japan, May. 2019, pp. 1 5, May. 2019. [37] Z. Rojec, A. Burmen, and I. Fajfar, An evolution-driven analog circuit topology synthesis, Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence, 2016. [38] J. R. Brews, A charge-sheet model of the MOSFET, Solid-State Electronics, Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 345 355, 1978. [39] H. Zhang, Y. Jing, and P. Zhou, Machine learning-based device modeling and per- formance optimization for FinFETs, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, Vol. 70, No. 4, pp. 1585 1593, Apr. 2023. [40] Y. Li, W. Dai, K. Geng, L. Zhang, R. Wang, and R. Huang, An automatic parameter extraction method based on autoencoder for PIN diode model, pp. 1 3, Oct. 2022.\n\n--- Segment 22 ---\n[40] Y. Li, W. Dai, K. Geng, L. Zhang, R. Wang, and R. Huang, An automatic parameter extraction method based on autoencoder for PIN diode model, pp. 1 3, Oct. 2022. [41] Seunghwan Lee, Seungjoon Eom, Jinsu Jeong, Junjong Lee, Sanguk Lee, Hyeok Yun, Yonghwan Ahn, and Rock-Hyun Baek, Multi-task learning for real-time BSIM-CMG parameter extraction of NSFETs with multiple structural variations, IEEE Access, Vol. 12, pp. 184619 184630, Dec. 2024. [42] Y. Wei, J. Wei, Q. Wu, and H. Wang, Machine learning-assisted on-chip quadrilat- eral interleaved transformer automatic synthesis, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 70, No. 3, pp. 1 10, Oct. 2022. [43] E. A. Karahan, J. Zhou, Z. Liu, Z. Shao, S. Fisher, and K. Sengupta, Deep Learning Enabled Design of RF mmWave IC and Antennas, pp. 769 772, Aug. 2024. [44] W. Dai, L. Zhang, and X. Chen, Statistical compact modeling with artificial neural networks, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 42, No. 12, pp. 5156 5160, Jun. 2023. [45] Z. Yang, A. D. Gaidhane, K. Anderson, G. Workman, and Y. Cao, Graph-based compact model (GCM) for efficient transistor parameter extraction: A machine learning approach on 12 nm FinFETs, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, Vol. 71, No. 1, pp. 254 262, Nov. 2024. [46] E. Chang, J. Han, W. Bae, Z. Wang, N. Narevsky, B. Nikoli, and E. Alon, BAG2: A process-portable framework for generator-based AMS circuit design, pp. 1 8, May 2018.\n\n--- Segment 23 ---\n[46] E. Chang, J. Han, W. Bae, Z. Wang, N. Narevsky, B. Nikoli, and E. Alon, BAG2: A process-portable framework for generator-based AMS circuit design, pp. 1 8, May 2018. [47] O. Okobiah, S. Mohanty, and E. Kougianos, Fast Design Optimization Through Simple Kriging Metamodeling: A Sense Amplifier Case Study, IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp. 932 937, Apr. 2014. [48] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, CALT: Classification with Adaptive Labeling Thresholds for Analog Circuit Sizing, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, pp. 49 54, Nov. 2020. [49] K. Hakhamaneshi, N. Werblun, P. Abbeel, and V. Stojanovic, BagNet: Berkeley analog generator with layout optimizer boosted with deep neural networks, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 1 8, Jul. 2019. [50] Weidong Cao et al., RoSE-Opt: Robust and Efficient Analog Circuit Parameter Optimization with Knowledge-Infused Reinforcement Learning, IEEE Transac- tions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Jul. 2023. [51] A. F. Budak, P. Bhansali, B. Liu, N. Sun, D. Z. Pan, and C. V. Kashyap, DNN- Opt: An RL Inspired Optimization for Analog Circuit Sizing using Deep Neural Networks, Proceedings of the Design Automation Conference, p. 1219 1224, Dec. 2021. [52] Ahmet F. Budak, D. Smart, B. Swahn, and D. Z. Pan, APOSTLE: asynchronously parallel optimization for sizing analog transistors using DNN learning, Proceed- ings of the Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, pp. 70 75, Jan. 2023.\n\n--- Segment 24 ---\n[52] Ahmet F. Budak, D. Smart, B. Swahn, and D. Z. Pan, APOSTLE: asynchronously parallel optimization for sizing analog transistors using DNN learning, Proceed- ings of the Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, pp. 70 75, Jan. 2023. [53] A. Gusmão, F. Passos, R. Póvoa, N. Horta, N. Lourenço, and R. Martins, Semi- Supervised Artificial Neural Networks towards Analog IC Placement Recom- mender, Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 1 5, Oct. 2020. [54] D. Guerra, A. Canelas, R. Póvoa, N. Horta, N. Lourenço, and R. Martins, Arti- ficial Neural Networks as an Alternative for Automatic Analog IC Placement, Proceedings of the International Conference on Synthesis, Modeling, Analysis and Simulation Methods and Applications to Circuit Design (SMACD), pp. 1 4, Jul. 2019. [55] A. Gusmão, R. Póvoa, N. Horta, N. Lourenço, and R. Martins, DeepPlacer: A Custom Integrated OpAmp Placement Tool Using Deep Models, Journal of Applied Soft Computing, Vol. 115, pp. 108188, Jan. 2022. [56] A. P. Lapas, N. Cavaco, N. Calado, and R. Miguel, Scalable and Order Invariant Analog Integrated Circuit Placement with Attention-based Graph-to-Sequence Deep Models, Journal of Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 207, pp. 117954, Jun, 2022. [57] K. Kunal, J. Poojary, T. Dhar, M. Madhusudan, R. Harjani, and S. S. Sapatnekar, A General Approach for Identifying Hierarchical Symmetry Constraints for Analog Circuit Layout, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design, pp. 1 8, Nov. 2020.\n\n--- Segment 25 ---\n[57] K. Kunal, J. Poojary, T. Dhar, M. Madhusudan, R. Harjani, and S. S. Sapatnekar, A General Approach for Identifying Hierarchical Symmetry Constraints for Analog Circuit Layout, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design, pp. 1 8, Nov. 2020. [58] M. Liu, W. Li, K. Zhu, B. Xu, Y. Lin, L. Shen, X. Tang, N. Sun, and D. Z. Pan, S3DET: Detecting System Symmetry Constraints for Analog Circuits with Graph Similarity, Proceedings of the Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, pp. 193 198, Mar. 2020. [59] Yiding Wei, Jun Liu, Dengbao Sun, Guodong Su, and Junchao Wang, From Netlist to Manufacturable Layout: An Auto-Layout Algorithm Optimized for Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits, Symmetry, Jun. 2023. [60] E. A. Karahan, Z. Liu, and K. Sengupta, Deep-learning-based inverse-designed millimeter-wave passives and power amplifiers, IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 58, No. 11, pp. 3074 3088, Nov. 2023. [61] Design Rule Complexity Rising, 2023. [62] Nibedita Karmokar, Meghna Madhusudan, Arvind K. Sharma, Ramesh Harjani, Mark Po-Hung Lin, and Sachin S. Sapatnekar, Common-Centroid Layout for Active and Passive Devices: A Review and the Road Ahead, Proceedings of the Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, pp. 114 121, Jan. 2022. [63] Jaeduk Han, Woorham Bae, Eric Chang, Zhongkai Wang, Borivoje Nikolić, and Elad Alon, LAYGO: A Template-and-Grid-Based Layout Generation Engine for Advanced CMOS Technologies, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, Vol. 68, No. 3, pp. 1012 1022, Mar. 2021.\n\n--- Segment 26 ---\n1012 1022, Mar. 2021. [64] E. Yilmaz and G. Dundar, Analog layout generator for CMOS circuits, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 32 45, Dec. 2009. [65] Hao Chen, Mingjie Liu, Biying Xu, Keren Zhu, Xiyuan Tang, Shaolan Li, Yibo Lin, Nan Sun, and David Z. Pan, MAGICAL: An Open- Source Fully Automated Analog IC Layout System from Netlist to GDSII, IEEE Design Test, Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 19 26, Apr. 2021. [66] Keren Zhu, Mingjie Liu, Yibo Lin, Biying Xu, Shaolan Li, Xiyuan Tang, Nan Sun, and David Z. Pan, GeniusRoute: A New Analog Routing Paradigm Using Generative Neural Network Guidance, Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 1 8, Nov 2019. [67] Pang-Yen Chou, Nai-Chen Chen, Mark Po-Hung Lin, and Helmut Graeb, Matched-Routing Common-Centroid 3-D MOM Capacitors for Low-Power Data Converters, IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, Vol. 25, No. 8, pp. 2234 2247, Apr. 2017. [68] W. Shi, H. Wang, J. Gu, M. Liu, D. Z. Pan, S. Han, and N. Sun, RobustAnalog: Fast Variation-Aware Analog Circuit Design Via Multi-task RL, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, pp. 35 41, Sep. 2022. [69] Z. Wu and I. Savidis, Variation-aware Analog Circuit Sizing with Classifier Chains, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, pp. 1 6, Sep. 2021. [70] X. Li, P. Gopalakrishnan, Y. Xu, and L. T. Pileggi, Robust Analog RF Circuit Design With Projection-Based Performance Modeling, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol.\n\n--- Segment 27 ---\n1 6, Sep. 2021. [70] X. Li, P. Gopalakrishnan, Y. Xu, and L. T. Pileggi, Robust Analog RF Circuit Design With Projection-Based Performance Modeling, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 2 15, December 2007. [71] T. McConaghy and G. G. E. Gielen, Globally Reliable Variation-Aware Sizing of Analog Integrated Circuits via Response Surfaces and Structural Homotopy, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 28, No. 11, pp. 1627 1640, Oct. 2009. [72] Po-Chun Wang, Mark Po-Hung Lin, Chien-Nan Jimmy Liu, and Hung-Ming Chen, Layout Synthesis of Analog Primitive Cells with Variational Autoencoder, Proceedings of the International Conference on Synthesis, Modeling, Analysis and Simulation Methods and Applications to Circuit Design (SMACD), pp. 1 4, Jul. 2023. [73] B. Cardoso, R. Martins, N. Lourenço, and N. Horta, AIDA-PEx: Accurate Parasitic Extraction for Layout-aware Analog Integrated Circuit Sizing, Proceedings of the Conference on Ph.D. Research in Microelectronics and Electronics, pp. 129 132, Jun. 2015. [74] B. Shook, P. Bhansali, C. Kashyap, C. Amin, and S. Joshi, MLParest: Machine Learning Based Parasitic Estimation for Custom Circuit Design, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Design Automation Conference, pp. 1 6, Mar. 2020. [75] H. Ren, G. F. Kokai, W. J. Turner, and T. Ku, ParaGraph: Layout Parasitics and Device Parameter Prediction Using Graph Neural Networks, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM Design Automation Conference, pp. 1 6, Nov. 2020.\n\n--- Segment 28 ---\n[75] H. Ren, G. F. Kokai, W. J. Turner, and T. Ku, ParaGraph: Layout Parasitics and Device Parameter Prediction Using Graph Neural Networks, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM Design Automation Conference, pp. 1 6, Nov. 2020. [76] K. Zhu, H. Chen, W. J. Turner, G. F. Kokai, P. Wei, D. Z. Pan, and H. Ren, TAG: Learning Circuit Spatial Embedding from Layouts, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, pp. 1 9, Oct. 2022. [77] Rongjian Liang, Zhiyao Xie, Jinwook Jung, Vishnavi Chauha, Yiran Chen, Jiang Hu, Hua Xiang, and Gi-Joon Nam, Routing-free crosstalk prediction, Proceedings Emerging ML-AI Techniques for Analog and RF EDA , of the International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, Dec. 2020. [78] V. A. Chhabria, W. Jiang, A. B. Kahng, and S. S. Sapatnekar, From Global Route to Detailed Route: ML for Fast and Accurate Wire Parasitics and Timing Prediction, Proceedings of the ACM IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, pp. 7 14, Sep. 2022. [79] P. Shrestha and I. Savidis, Graph Representation Learning for Parasitic Impedance Prediction of the Interconnect, Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 1 5, May 2023. [80] T. Nguyen, B. Shi, H. Ma, E. Li, X. Chen, A. C. Cangellaris, and J. E. Schutt- Aine, Comparative study of surrogate modeling methods for signal integrity and microwave circuit applications, IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology, Vol. 11, pp. 1369 1379, Sep. 2021. [81] P. Shrestha, A. Aversa, S. Phatharodom, and I. Savidis, EDA-schema: A graph datamodel schema and open dataset for digital design automation, Proceedings of the ACM Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI, pp.\n\n--- Segment 29 ---\n1369 1379, Sep. 2021. [81] P. Shrestha, A. Aversa, S. Phatharodom, and I. Savidis, EDA-schema: A graph datamodel schema and open dataset for digital design automation, Proceedings of the ACM Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI, pp. 1 8, Jun. 2024. [82] P. Shrestha and I. Savidis, EDA-ML: Graph representation learning framework for digital IC design automation, Proceedings of the International Symposium on Quality Electronic Design, pp. 241 246, Apr. 2024. [83] J. Jung, A. B. Kahng, S. Kim, and R. Varadarajan, METRICS2.1 and flow tuning in the IEEE CEDA robust design flow and OpenROAD, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design, pp. 1 9, Nov. 2021. [84] Rongjian Liang, Anthony Agnesina, Geraldo Pradipta, Vidya A Chhabria, and Haoxing Ren, CircuitOps: An ML Infrastructure Enabling Generative AI for VLSI Circuit Optimization, Proceedings of the IEEE ACM International Conference on Computer Aided Design, pp. 1 6, 2023. [85] P. Shrestha, S. Phatharodom, A. Aversa, D. Blankenship, Z. Wu, and I. Savidis, Deep Representation Learning for Electronic Design Automation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02105, May 2025.\n\n